Rick and Steve had no idea what
type of bones they were looking
at
but they seemed intriguing
they took pictures and decided
to show them to Pedro
so needless to say i called
professor burger he didn't
answer his phone we decided
we're going to drive to his
house because now we're all
excited bubbling of course
arriving at his home around the
belt and really answered my
question was Leigh you really
want to talk to us
I know immediately that that was
a fossil hamid and it was not a
human I could tell by the
proportions of the teeth I could
tell by its size you can see
that fine scientific scale that
I'm lucky we have not got in
trouble for because if you read
carefully says home sewing aid
only on the side of it but I
could see that this was
something extraordinary second
to that it was just lying there
on the ground now that doesn't
happen in south africa i assure
you it doesn't happen in south
africa that skull that you saw
that Matthew had found in that
hard rock that rock is like
concrete that skull and skeleton
just one of them took about
22,000 preparation hours to get
to that state
this is lying there the next
picture confirm that this was
something truly extraordinary
every one of those bones I
realized with Hamid believe me
they are any one train for me
would look at that and say my
gosh
and they're just lying there in
dirt
even more extraordinary there
was a skull can you see the
curvature they're just sitting
in dirt on the floor and it
looked tiny so i decided i need
to put someone in there that i
absolutely trusted that could
take a scientific photograph of
these things and i happen to
know someone who fit the
physiological profile that could
get down that cave I trusted
immensely my then six foot four
son who's sitting in the
audience today who is
physiologically appropriate get
down a seven and a half inch
slot showed him how to use a
scientific camera gave him a
scale
and a few days later we went
into this cave a torturous route
that took us almost 50 minutes
to get to the base of dragons
back up we went up this thing
where if you slip off you die
we get to the edge of that curve
loss and we look down it and
down i sent Matthew with Rick
and Steve because i'm trying for
father of the year
there i sat in the dark looking
at this impossible route
how in the world was i going to
accomplish an expedition in
excavation here 45 minutes or so
go by and I hear scrabbling
Matthews head pops up because
I'm going for father year I
didn't know you are you okay i
went and and Matthew handed me
the camera and said daddy
it's amazing - beautiful
it was everything that those
original pictures it said and
that's when I know I had to push
the button didn't know what
button to push because i needed
people to work in there
I need people to effectively
risk their lives in a well known
cave down a seven and a half
inch slot underground in a
fragile relatively shallow
environment that could have
gases in it could collapse at
any time
I had no idea how is going to
find people with skills and to
be paleoanthropologists
archaeologists and to be able to
excavate there they have
climbing skills all these things
I did what any one of you would
do i put a facebook at out
that facebook ad asked for
skinny scientists they had to be
able to work in underground
environments climbing skills not
claustrophobic
that wasn't telling them what
they do that to drop everything
be ready within three weeks from
that date to come for a month
south africa i wasn't going to
pay you
oh and by the way you have to
have a PhD or masters in pale
anthropology archaeology
eccentric cetera
hit Send thinking the replied 3
people in the world that would
fit that within 10 days i had
almost 60 qualified applicants
eighty percent of which were
young women i selected from that
six extraordinary scientists who
just happened to be young women
these extraordinary scientists
dropped everything and flew to
South Africa within three weeks
we'd put together a 60-person
expedition all the support teams
you need the safety cavers
planning this extensive
underground expedition at the
same time
this great society took another
risk they agreed to do this live
to the world because i thought
this may be the last moment in
history where we actually can
bring the world
the recovery of a fossil Hamid
skeleton and so they let us
create this blog and website
already to tweet and facebook
and blog and go live on the day
we went underground a very brave
move by the way because if I was
wrong
this was going to be a rather
large embarrassment on November
the seventh that 60 team
expedition launched in the field
over the next couple of days we
laid three and a half kilometers
of military-grade audio-visual
cables cameras all the machinery
that we would need to conduct
this excavation live underground
we would create command centers
caving tins aside
I instant to take this skeleton
out live in front of the world
in November tenth we launched
the rising star expedition
there we sent those scientists
into this cave lad initially by
matthew and we watch these
amazing images very quickly
these amazing scientists became
known as underground astronauts
and yes i have received enough
hate mail about why they
shouldn't be called astronauts
they should be called Terra not
sort rugland knots or some other
version of that I am I apologize
but I'm not that sorry because
it really was like watching
astronauts on the space walk it
kid up in the safety year
helmets on all this stuff and
equipment and they would vanish
from our sites and they would
appear in these black-and-white
images as they crawled through
these cave systems taking off in
40 45 minutes to get to that
shoot and then they would vanish
from our communications as they
went down the slot where they
could wear no safety gear
because it's a tight and they
began to excavate material and
these are the kind of images
that we were watching
I could communicate live with
them they couldn't see me but I
could talk to them
the collection began we designed
technology that had never been
used before underground white
light laser scanners that were
giving us real time scans on
computers like that down to
resolution 2.3 of a millimeter
is we're mapping underground
with these scanners it was
amazing and material began to
come out and buy the second day
we realized i had been wrong
it was not a skeleton it was
more than one skeleton by day
two we had three right femur
assure you there's no primate in
the world has three right legs
as we would go by the end of the
first week we had discovered
more fossil Hamid material then
in the richest site ever
discovered in the search for
human origins in southern Africa
in one week and I could see that
site right out my command center
because it was less than a mile
away
ok